Request Limiter docs (#25557)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/concepts/request-limiter.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: 'Request Limiter'
description: >-
  Vault provides an adaptive concurrency limiter to protect the Vault server
  from overload.
---

# Request Limiter

@include 'alerts/enterprise-only.mdx'

@include 'alerts/beta.mdx'

This document contains conceptual information about the **Request Limiter** and
its user-facing effects.

## Preventing overload

> The Request Limiter aims to prevent overload by proactively detecting latency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Request Limiter aims to prevent overload by proactively detecting latency increases from a baseline
```

Author: I addressed this in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/25557/commits/7a38c1ff7ee0448f14b115478f967947a06e704e and used "deviation" instead of "increases". Let me know what you think!

and adapting the number of allowed in-flight requests.

This is done in two phases at the beginning of an HTTP request:

1. Consult the current number of allowed in-flight requests. If the new request
would exceed this limit, immediately reject it, indicating that the client
should retry later.

2. If the request is allowed, begin a measurement of its latency, allowing the
Request Limiter to calculate a new limit.

## Resource constraints

The Request Limiter intentionally focuses on preventing overload derived from

> resource-constrained operations on the Vault server. There are two known
> resource-constrained request paths in Vault:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource-constrained operations on the Vault server. Vault focusses on two specific types of resource constraint which commonly cause issues in production workloads that exceed the capability of the available hardware. They are:
```

Author: Thanks for this. Definitely reads a lot better now. Addressed in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/25557/commits/7a38c1ff7ee0448f14b115478f967947a06e704e

> 1. Back pressure from the storage backend, resulting in bufferbloat in the WAL
> system (enterprise) for `Write`-based HTTP methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Write latency in the storage backend, resulting in a growing queue of updates to be flushed. These writes originate primarily from `Write`-based HTTP methods.
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/25557/commits/7a38c1ff7ee0448f14b115478f967947a06e704e

> 2. Back pressure from CPU over-utilization via PKI issue requests (specifically
> for RSA keys), resulting in failed heartbeats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. CPU utilization caused by computationally expensive PKI issue requests (generally for RSA keys). Large numbers of these requests can consume all CPU resources preventing timely processing of other requests such as heartbeats and health checks, causing cluster instability or unnecessary failover actions.
```

Storage constraints can be accounted for by limiting logical requests according

> to their `http.Method`. We only limit requests with write-based methods, since
> these will result in storage Puts and exhibit the aforementioned bufferbloat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to their `http.Method`. We only measure and limit requests with write-based methods because read requests do not cause storage updates in general, and their latency is unlikely to be correlated with the time taken to write to the storage backend.
```

> CPU constraints are accounted for using the same underlying library and
> technique; however, they require special treatment. The maximum number of
> concurrent pki/issue requests found in testing (again, specifically for RSA
> keys) is far lower than the minimum tolerable write request rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CPU constraints are accounted for using the same underlying library and
technique; however, they the nature of the resource is different. The maximum number of concurrent PKI issue requests is directly linked to how many hardware CPU cores are available for the expensive computations. This number tends to be lower and more absolute than storage system throughput and latency so we need a separate limiter tuned to respond to the types of behaviour saturating CPU has on request latency.
```

Not sure about this one but trying to give a feel for why it's different to build intuition rather than just state it.

> In both cases, utilization will be effectively throttled before Vault reaches
> any degraded state. The resulting `503 - Service Unavailable` is a retryable
> HTTP response code, which can be handled to gracefully retry and eventually
> succeed.  Clients should handle this by retrying with jitter and exponential
> backoff. This is done within Vault's API, using the go-retryablehttp library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both cases, once request latencies start to rise above the baseline averages, the number of concurrent requests Vault will serve will start to be reduced. If a request comes in when Vault has determined it's near capacity it may receive an immediate `503 - Service Unavailable`, This is a retryable
HTTP response code, which can be handled to gracefully retry and eventually
succeed.  Clients should handle this by retrying with jitter and exponential
backoff. This is done automatically for clients using Vaults official Go client `api` package.
```

## Read requests

> HTTP methods, such as `GET` and `LIST` are currently not subject to request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP methods, such as `GET` and `LIST` are not subject to write request
```

limiting. This allows operators to continue querying server state without

> needing to retry. This decision was based on the observation that read-based
> requests are not as likely to cause untenable load than their
> resource-constrained counterparts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needing to retry.
```

I'm not sure this statement is accurate - we probably will want to limit read requests in the future too since every request type will hit resource constraints and cause instability eventually. The key is that it's a _different resource constaint_ such as memory usage for open connections, or CPU usage with too many goroutines.

We already said above that the write limiter doesn't bother with read requests because those don't hit the same bottleneck and have different performance characteristics so it seems fine to leave this out here and in future we can replace this with additional limiter types as we choose to tackle different sources of resource saturation.

Author: Removed in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/25557/commits/7a38c1ff7ee0448f14b115478f967947a06e704e

to their `http.Method`. We only limit requests with write-based methods, since
these will result in storage Puts and exhibit the aforementioned bufferbloat.

CPU constraints are accounted for using the same underlying library and
technique; however, they require special treatment. The maximum number of
concurrent pki/issue requests found in testing (again, specifically for RSA
keys) is far lower than the minimum tolerable write request rate.

In both cases, utilization will be effectively throttled before Vault reaches
any degraded state. The resulting `503 - Service Unavailable` is a retryable
HTTP response code, which can be handled to gracefully retry and eventually
succeed.  Clients should handle this by retrying with jitter and exponential
backoff. This is done within Vault's API, using the go-retryablehttp library.

## Read requests

HTTP methods, such as `GET` and `LIST` are currently not subject to request
limiting. This allows operators to continue querying server state without
needing to retry. This decision was based on the observation that read-based
requests are not as likely to cause untenable load than their
resource-constrained counterparts.

> ## `503 - Service Unavailable`

Author: I'm probably going to pull this out into its own page with a top-level heading of "Vault server temporarily overloaded" to improve search-ability.
